---
title: "Challenges"
image: ../images/challenges.svg
---

Getting into the professional field of creative technology can be challenging,
and especially when you are just starting. It is hard to locate an industry that
feels like it suits your interests and skills and pays a salary. [1] Moreover,
only a small fraction of the high-powered hybrid jobs nowadays is entry-level.
To get over it, a worker can learn new skills through several years of practice
and self-development. But if there are no entry-level jobs, then it gets tough
to get this experience. [2] At the same time, we are adding new technology every
year and rarely removing any of the old ones. Companies might expect you to keep
up with every little change and move in the tech stack. [1]

Design technologists are often in a gray zone - they are frequently switching
between technologies and do not have the in-depth knowledge that specialists
usually have in a specific discipline. [5] They are not getting a thorough
understanding of software development, as their colleagues, software architects,
for example, do. It is even more challenging to get competent in the design
field, where designers were learning the skills throughout their life. As a
result, design specialists might not have the skills or expertise for which
companies are quite often searching.

The education system is not going to help, data and skills in curricula often do
not intersect between study programs, and traditional higher education is not as
fast-changing as the technology stack. Moreover, quite often, nobody encourages
workers to get additional training at their working place; they are usually left
on their own to decide what and how to learn. [2] On the other hand, companies
underestimate the need for improving skills and think that workers can take a
few classes on coding and then name them developers. The same concerns design -
it is not just about taking online courses; you need to train this skill. [4]
Workers thus need to understand where their field is going to and the pathways
they can follow. [2]

Given the above, it is clear that it might be impossible to master all of the
skills, and thus you need to find personal direction for your talents and
improve what is crucial for you. You have to keep some general knowledge about
everything, but you also need to focus on skills that are going to help
career-wise. [1] Companies require an extensive set of skills from different
fields for design technologists (design, user experience, data analysis and
interpretation, business understanding). As a result, they are rapidly
increasing in value, and thus the salary can be higher than of a specialist like
Software Developer, UX designer or UX researcher. [2]

The industry is a lot more mature and stable these days. Still, the working
experience of a creative tech varies in different companies; there is a contrast
between a one-product company and a web agency, an established company, and a
startup. [1] Many companies are searching for so-called unicorns, assuming that
you are going to do multiple roles divided proportionally between each other. It
usually means that company leaders either don't understand the benefits of a
multidisciplinary specialist or they are just trying to pay less. [3] Doing all
those tasks as a job is a massive amount of work, and one full-time person
probably is not going to cover all of it.

There are also personal challenges for design technologists. Workers of this
sphere usually are coming from a front-end development background, and start
directly to work with UX and design. As developers, they tend to overlook user
needs for the sake of technical integrity and code beauty. This attitude has to
be changed, and solutions should be done first for the user and just after that
for the team. There is always a danger that something suitable for a team might
not be on the same level of interest for the end-user, and thus the team might
sacrifice some useful features during the product creation. [6]

Another personal challenge for design technologists is health. All the
difficulties mentioned above can affect mood, ability to work and lead to
different side effects. One of them is, for example, imposter syndrome; due to
it, people think they are not as competent as other people think they are. And
thus, they do not apply to the jobs and the projects they desire and deserve,
and that leads to unnecessary anxiety. [7]

One of the ways to avoid that is to be able to accept criticism, be ready to
hear, learn from it; otherwise, battles at work can easily hurt. It is part of
the game - to work well with a team. Advancing career also means that you will
be with larger organizations, and you can hit a limit of the size of the project
at some point, if not working well with the current colleagues. [1] This is
especially important because design technologists very often join directly, not
a startup, but a big company, with multiple teams, design and creative
directors, head of UX research, developers, designers, and project managers. [8]

## References

1. Neal B. Advice for Creative Technologists
   (https://medium.com/@laserpilot/advice-for-creative-technologists-21f3f220b2)
2. Burning Glass Technologies. Report. The Hybrid Job Economy: How New Skills
   are Rewriting the DNA of the Job Market
   (https://www.burning-glass.com/wp-content/uploads/hybrid_jobs_2019_final.pdf)
3. Just in mind, UX Planet. Should designers learn front-end development? 10
   UX-perts weigh in
   (https://uxplanet.org/should-designers-learn-front-end-development-10-ux-perts-weigh-in-7fb22c2ae21d)
4. Kowitz B. From Google Ventures: How To Hire The Best Designer For Your Team
   (https://www.fastcompany.com/1673110/what-to-look-for-when-hiring-a-designer)
5. Spool J.M. Ideal UX Team Makeup: Specialists, Generalists, or
   Compartmentalists (https://articles.uie.com/ideal_ux_team/)
6. Wikipedia. Impostor syndrome
   (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Impostor_syndrome)
7. Merholz P., Skinner K. O'Reilly Media, Inc. Org Design for Design Orgs. 2016
