---
title: "Cooperation with other team members"
image: ../images/cooperation.svg
---

Design Technologist is a very varied role, so you will need to be comfortable
wearing a lot of different hats. As with other UX roles, communication and
cooperation are the key, because one should be able to close the gap between
designers, developers, and product managers at the same time. Design
Technologists should be able to speak with various stakeholders and have the
right skills to make the business work. Since it always takes some effort to
understand the viewpoints of other team members, it will often require from you
to be outgoing, sharp, confident to present your ideas. <ref>1</ref><ref>2</ref>

A Design Technologist often takes part with designers in group design activities
(brainstorming, design critiques, user research, etc.). Therefore, it is
particularly important to develop creative thinking, design skills and knowledge
of design tools. During concepting, design technologists help designers
understand technical restrictions and opportunities that are given to a project
on the designer's ideas. <ref>3</ref>

One of the biggest challenges is to translate designer language to engineers,
especially in waterfall product development. Cooperation between designers and
design technologists creates valuable insights for further experiments,
calculates a designer idea’s feasibility to be integrated with the user needs,
technology opportunities and business requirements. Sometimes, basic details are
not discussed by developers and designers because the first assumes that the
latter are aware of technical problems when that is often not the case. It is
common that a designer creates wireframes and hands them off to engineers, with
no communication after the mock-ups are complete. This makes designers project
living separately from technical constraints and sometimes they are impossible
to implement. Furthermore, by the time the mocks have been coded, it sometimes
does not look anymore like what the designer was thinking of. Minimizing such
misunderstanding and miscommunication may help save time and
nerves.<ref>4</ref><ref>5</ref><ref>6</ref><ref>7</ref>

Design technologists are the first contact point for engineers when they need
design help. They have an eye for design, and they speak the same language as
engineers, understand their needs and restrictions. Thus, close cooperation with
engineers aligns code with platform design and UX. <ref>2</ref><ref>7</ref>

Design technologists also cooperate with UX researchers, planing and
implementing UX studies together with them. Design technologists should be able
to produce prototypes, ranging from low to high allegiance, by supplying more
real of the product and the higher quality of feedback than designer’s prototype
in their design tools. Other tasks include gathering and evaluating user
requirements, creating storyboards, process flows, and sitemaps, managing
usability testing. <ref>2</ref><ref>5</ref>

1. Neal B., Advice for Creative Technologist
   (https://medium.com/@laserpilot/advice-for-creative-technologists-21f3f220b2)
2. Stevens E., 5 UX specialties that could be your next career move
   (https://www.invisionapp.com/inside-design/5-ux-specialties/)
3. Bird J., No, UX **\_\_\_** is not a dumb job title
   (https://uxplanet.org/no-ux-is-not-a-dumb-job-title-927a83b37888)
4. Cordova, Design Thinking in UX Engineering
   (https://medium.com/uxelab/2-design-thinking-in-ux-engineering-c8d75b99ef82)
5. Kushner M.H., Your UX Team Needs a Design Technologist. Here’s Why
   (https://blog.prototypr.io/your-ux-team-needs-a-design-technologist-heres-why-3426be8f78a)
6. Kashkinova A. NET magazine, October 2019, Issue 324. Become a hybrid designer
7. George K., Why your team needs a design technologist
   (https://medium.com/@katie.george/why-your-team-needs-a-design-technologist-3c83d3ac18ba)
