---
title: "Who is a Design Technologist?"
image: ../images/who-is-a-design-technologist.svg
aspectRatio: 0.5504495504495504
order: 3
description:
  "Design Technologists exist in a gray zone - not quite pure engineers, not
  actual designers."
references:
  [
    {
      text:
        "Kashkinova A. NET magazine, October 2019, Issue 324. Become a hybrid
        designer",
    },
    {
      text: "Stevens, E. Why Should Designers Learn To Code?",
      href: "https://careerfoundry.com/en/blog/ux-design/why-should-designers-learn-to-code/",
    },
    {
      text: "Pine B.J., Gilmore J.H.",
      href: "https://hbr.org/1998/07/welcome-to-the-experience-economy",
    },
    {
      text:
        "Maeda J., Stinson L. Wired. John Maeda: If You Want to Survive in
        Design, You Better Learn to Code",
      href: "https://www.wired.com/2017/03/john-maeda-want-survive-design-better-learn-code/",
    },
    {
      text:
        "Knights R. The Emerging Role of the Creative Technologist in the New
        Digital Ecosystem",
      href: "https://wiprodigital.com/2017/02/14/emerging-role-creative-technologist-new-digital-ecosystem/",
    },
    {
      text:
        "Lindberg O. Best Practices for a Smoother Designer-Developer Handoff",
      href: "https://xd.adobe.com/ideas/perspectives/leadership-insights/guide-to-smooth-designer-developer-handoffs/",
    },
    {
      text: "George K. Why your team needs a Design Technologist",
      href: "https://medium.com/@katie.george/why-your-team-needs-a-design-technologist-3c83d3ac18ba",
    },
    {
      text: "Ansyah C. Design Thinking in UX Engineering",
      href: "https://medium.com/@cordovansyah/2-design-thinking-in-ux-engineering-1f047898020e",
    },
    {
      text: "Bird J. No, UX **\_\_\_** is not a dumb job title",
      href: "https://uxplanet.org/no-ux-is-not-a-dumb-job-title-927a83b37888",
    },
    {
      text:
        "eBay. Senior Design Technologist (Fetched 15/03/2020 at
        devsnap.io/job/957431-senior-design-technologist-ebay)",
    },
    {
      text:
        "Merholz P., Skinner K. O'Reilly Media, Inc. Org Design for Design Orgs.
        2016",
    },
    {
      text: "Loue E. What is UX Engineering?",
      href: "https://medium.com/indeed-design/what-is-a-design-technologist-6431531f0d48",
    },
    {
      text: "Kushner M.H. Your UX Team Needs a Design Technologist. Hereâ€™s Why",
      href: "https://blog.prototypr.io/your-ux-team-needs-a-design-technologist-heres-why-3426be8f78a",
    },
    {
      text: "Ansyah C. What is UX Engineering?",
      href: "https://medium.com/uxelab/1-what-is-ux-engineering-269df7fcfe10",
    },
  ]
---

The spike in attention to the topic of cross-domain professionals is not a
surprise in a world where the number of startups keeps growing exponentially.
Many companies today understand the need for design thinking, and the hiring
spree in the design industry continues to speed up. The Harvard Business Journal
explained this shift by introducing the term "Experience Economy," where
consumers use their money on buying experiences rather than goods. As a result,
companies that do not prioritize user experience will lose their business, and
other more agile companies will fill their vacant slots quickly. In other words,
customers are not interested anymore in companies who prioritize the wealth of
the company over the experiences of their consumers. The once-popular waterfall
method for product development was not able to overcome this paradigm shift. It
tried to break down project activities into linear sequential phases, but at the
same time, it ensured that there was a wall between creative thinking and
development. Later on, business leaders were going to remove it with agile
development, but instead, they strengthened this barrier. The innovative core,
which was supposed to connect all the processes, has not joined designers and
developers, because there have been no processes that would join separated teams
in practice. This influences product development in a way that any changes,
coming from user research insights to an approved design, can not be done or can
have a severe impact on the end
product.<ref>1</ref><ref>2</ref><ref>3</ref><ref>4</ref><ref>5</ref><ref>6</ref>

Luckily, the tech world has realized that only coding is not enough to deliver
an excellent user experience - a design talent should also take part in the
process. Today, unique user experience is often integrative, bringing together
objects, apps, products, services, touch screens, wearables, etc. The
traditional designer/developer division, in a way, undermines the creative
process. The difference between software development and design becomes less
clear, their integration into product development is strong as never before, and
perfectly represents the current market demand. Essentially, the shift created a
need for a cross-domain professional in designing and coding. Someone who can
quickly recognize the problem, develop the solution, test it, and thus waste
less time on preparations and more time on working. Someone who has a passion
for technology and desire to push its
capacities.<ref>2</ref><ref>7</ref><ref>8</ref>

Consequently, the Design Technologist role has emerged in the job market to
resolve the obstacles mentioned above. This role is also known as UX
engineer/developer or Creative Technologist. They are quite often Front-End
Developers at the core; still, they exist in a gray zone - not quite pure
engineers, not actual designers. However, this hybrid status is attractive to
technology companies that are looking for those who can identify obstacles and
build solutions at the same time. Their software development experience enables
them to code in a real context, work with irregular data sets, and alternate
between efficiency and user behavior. The design technologists certainly have a
bias towards action - instead of talking about solving a UX problem, they build
exploratory solutions to solve that problem through a series of prototyping.
Their main aim is to bring UX, design, and engineering expertise together to
build product prototypes and to help to test the effectiveness of a solution.
They guide other developers in building fidelity prototypes using the most
suitable tools for the task, actively take part in concept development, and
design iteration. There are at least three categories that describe the
technologist's impact: driving the iterative design and validation process,
building bridges between design and developing, researching, and implementing
tools to increase productivity. They are capable of improving the efficiency of
ideating and product development while being restricted by design principles,
requirements, styles, and UX.<ref>8</ref><ref>9</ref>

Still, Design Technologists are different from UX designers: the first ones
execute concept development through prototyping and understanding about system
design engineering-wise, and design system design-wise. Design technologists
also partner closely with UX researchers to plan studies that test the team's
hypotheses. The higher the fidelity of the prototype, the more real it will feel
to the user and the better quality of feedback the team will receive. On the
other hand, the traditional project takes over user research feedback too
slowly, getting it only into the next sprint, and mixing it with different
deadlines and business needs.<ref>9</ref><ref>13</ref><ref>14</ref>

The Design Technologists can also be able to encourage leaders to invest in
innovative ideas using their unique viewpoints. That allows design conversations
to have a broader look at the subject by pointing out opportunities that might
be invisible to others. They speak the same language as developers and designers
and thus avoid the situations when coded mockups look nothing like what the
designer intended. Moreover, design teams get advantages from being able to
engage during the exploration of design solutions. For example, prototyping
helps designers see the immediate impacts of their design. Otherwise, if
designers limit their view only by wireframes, it can lead to the
reconsideration of their solution already after the product release. Design
Technologists uncover this earlier and thus without a significant
investment.<ref>7</ref><ref>10</ref><ref>11</ref>

Design Technologist's tasks can pop up at any design phase, like creating
wireframes, prototypes, running experiments, and estimating engineer's work.
They do not fit into the traditional product delivery process. Instead, they
work through all the stages of product development. In practice, technologists
create empathy between design and coding and take care of essential items like
consistency, brand, and usability, and tiny things like CSS animations, button
alignment, and error messages. It is necessary to mention, though, that one
concrete tech stack does not limit Design Technologists because the stack should
match the deliverable output according to corresponding time limits. They should
be capable of designing constraints to improve efficiency on the level of the
concept, instead of the real product development process. Basically, having a
Design Technologist on the team means there is always an engineer whose job is
primarily the user experience.<ref>7</ref><ref>12</ref>
